RFC - Network communication protocol (#115)
tari-project/tari: RFC/src/RFC-0170_NetworkCommunicationProtocol.md

> # RFC-0170: Network Communication Protocol

Author: Updated in new PR.

> # RFC-0170: Network Communication Protocol

Reviewer: Change not evident?

> # RFC-0170: Network Communication Protocol

Author: Did not click the save button.

> 

Author: Change applied.

> 

Reviewer: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/39146854/52622247-ff5ec200-2eb1-11e9-83f7-d30f54183cd4.png)

> 

Author: Added spaces.

[BCP 14](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp14) (covering RFC2119 and RFC8174) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as 
shown here.

## Disclaimer

The purpose of this document and its content is for information purposes only and may be subject to change or update
without notice.

This document may include preliminary concepts that may or may not be in the process of being developed by the Tari
community. The release of this document is intended solely for review and discussion by the community regarding the
technological merits of the potential system outlined herein.

## Goals

This document will introduce the Tari communication network and the communication protocol used to select, establish and maintain connections between peers on the network.
[Consensus Node]s and [Consensus Client]s will be introduced and their required functionality will be proposed.

## Related RFCs

* [RFC-0100: The Tari Base Layer](RFC-0100_BaseLayer.md)
* [RFC-0300: Digital asset network](RFC-0300_DAN.md)

## Description

### Assumptions

- A communication channel can be established between two peers once their online communication addresses are known to each other.

> - A [Validator Node] is able to obtain a [node id] from the registration process on the Base Layer.

Reviewer: If in agreement, please capitalize ID everywhere in the text.

> - A [Validator Node] is able to obtain a [node id] from the registration process on the Base Layer.

Author: Applied change everywhere.

> - A [Validator Node] is able to obtain a [node id] from the registration process on the Base Layer.

Author: I'm not sure the node ID is obtained from the "registration information" because it is not recorded on the Base Layer. The node ID is calculated from the location where the Validator Nodes registration appears on the Base Layer. That is why I believed that "registration process" was a better description.

> - A [Validator Node] is able to obtain a [node id] from the registration process on the Base Layer.

Reviewer: To obtain something from a "_process_" active participation is required. 
Maybe state "_A [Validator Node] is able to derive a [node ID] from the registered location on the Base Layer._"?

> - A [Validator Node] is able to obtain a [node id] from the registration process on the Base Layer.

Author: Change applied.

### Abstract

> The Tari communication network consists of a large number of nodes that maintained peer connections between each other.

Author: - Change applied in new PR.
- A CC can use the network and is on the network, but it is not the network as it doesn't propagate any messages. We can use a cellphone network as a metaphor to explain the roles of CCs and CNs. A CC is like a cellphone and a CN is like a Cell-tower. The network or network infrastructure is only the Cell-towers.  Cellphone are on the network, but only as client of the network.

> The Tari communication network consists of a large number of nodes that maintained peer connections between each other.

Reviewer: - Which PR?
- Perfect, point taken

These nodes forward and propagate encrypted and unencrypted data messages through the network such as joining requests, discovery requests, [transaction]s and completed [block]s.
Network clients, not responsible for maintaining the network, are able to create ad hoc connections with nodes on the network to perform joining and discovery requests.
The majority of communication between clients and nodes will be performed using direct Peer-to-peer (P2P) communication once the discovery process was used to obtain the online communication addresses of peers.
Where possible the efficient Kademlia based directed forwarding of encrypted data messages can be used to perform quick node discovery and joining of clients and nodes on the Tari communication network. 
Where messages are of importance to a wide variety of entities on the network, Gossip protocol based message propagation can be performed to distribute the message to the entire network.

### Overview

> The Tari communication network is a variant of a Kademlia network that allows for fast discovery of nodes, with an added ability to perform Gossip protocol based broadcasting of data messages to the entire network.

Author: Applied in new PR.

The majority of the communication required on the [Base Layer] and [Digital Asset Network] (DAN) will be performed via direct P2P communication between known clients and nodes.

> Alternatively, the Tari communication network can be used for broadcasting joining requests, discovery requests and propagating data messages such as completed blocks, transactions and data messages that are of interest to a large part of the Tari communication network. 

Author: When you want to submit an instruction. I believe the CC or CN will first use a discovery request to contact the Committee and then submit the instruction using a direct P2P channel. I don't believe Instructions will be propagated through the network, except if it was maybe sent as a hidden encrypted data message. I don't mind adding "Instructions", but this was my reasoning behind not including it.

> Alternatively, the Tari communication network can be used for broadcasting joining requests, discovery requests and propagating data messages such as completed blocks, transactions and data messages that are of interest to a large part of the Tari communication network. 

Reviewer 2: That makes sense.

The Tari communication network consists of a number of different entities that need to communicate in a distributed and ad-hoc manner. 

> The primary entities that need to communicate are Validator Nodes (VN), [Base Node]s (BN), [Wallet]s (W) and Asset Managers (AM).

Author: I changed "Asset Manager" to "Token Wallet" and I also changed "AM" to "TW".

Here are some examples of different communication tasks that need to be performed by these entities on the Tari Communication network:
- Base Nodes on the Base Layer need to propagate completed blocks and transactions to other Base Nodes using Gossip protocol based broadcasting.
- Validator Nodes need to efficiently discover other Validator Nodes in the process of forming Validator Node committees. 
- Wallets need to communicate and negotiate with other Wallets to create transactions. They also need the ability to submit transactions to the [mempool] of Base Nodes.
- Asset Managers need to communicate with Validator Node [committee]s and other Asset Managers to construct and send DAN instructions.

Here is an overview communication matrix that show which source entities need to communicate with other destination entities on the Tari Communication network:

> | Source  \  Destination | Validator Node | Base Node | Wallet | Asset Manager|

Author: I did a quick test and the break renders the "destination" text  below the "source" text, which changes how the table is interpreted.

> | Source  \  Destination | Validator Node | Base Node | Wallet | Asset Manager|

Reviewer: This

 `&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;\Destination<br>Source` 

will give you this

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/39146854/52613872-5788ca80-2e98-11e9-8fa0-1ba6c333180d.png)

> | Source  \  Destination | Validator Node | Base Node | Wallet | Asset Manager|

Author: Change applied

|---                     |---             |---        |---     |---           |
| Validator Node         | Yes            | Yes       | Yes    | Yes          |
| Base Node              | No             | Yes       | No     | No           |

> | Wallet                 | No             | Yes       | Yes    | No           |

Author: A Wallet doesn't know anything about Tokens and will never be the source of communication with a Token Wallet. A Token Wallet on the other hand might initiate comms with Wallets, such as when a user buys tokens from another user. We can discuss this more if needed.

> | Wallet                 | No             | Yes       | Yes    | No           |

Reviewer: Ok, so I get thepoint. Maybe clarifying this in the sentence above the table will alleviate confusion, example 
"_... show which source entities initiate communication with other destination entities ..._"

> | Wallet                 | No             | Yes       | Yes    | No           |

Author: I applied your suggestion

| Asset Manager          | Yes            | No        | Yes    | Yes          |

#### Consensus Nodes and Consensus Clients

To simplify the description of the Tari communication network, the different entities with similar behaviour were grouped into two groups: Consensus Nodes and Consensus Clients.
Validator Nodes and Base Nodes are Consensus Nodes(CN).

> Wallets and Asset Managers are Communication Clients(CC).

Author: Changed in new PR.

> Wallets and Asset Managers are Communication Clients(CC).

Reviewer: Which PR?

> CNs form the core communication infrastructure of the Tari communication network and is responsible for maintaining the Tari communication network by receiving, forwarding and distributing joining requests, discovery requests, data messages and routing information.

Author: Change made in new PR.

CCs are different from CNs in that they do not maintain the network and they are not responsible for propagating any joining requests, discovery requests, data messages and routing information.
They do make use of the network to submit their own joining requests and perform discovery request of other specific CNs and CCs when they need to communicate with them.
Once a CC has discovered the CC or CN they want to communicate with, they will establish a direct P2P channel with them.

> The Tari communication network is unaware of this direct P2P communication once discovery was completed.

Author: Change made in new PR.

The different entity types were grouped into the different communication node types as follows:

| Entity Type    | Communication Node Type |
|---             |---                      |
| Validator Node | Consensus Node          |
| Base Node      | Consensus Node          |
| Wallet         | Consensus Client        |
| Asset Manager  | Consensus Client        |

#### Unique identification of Consensus Nodes and Consensus Clients 

In the Tari communication network, each CN or CC makes use of a node id to determine their position in the network.
This node id is either assigned based on registration on the Base Layer or can be derived from the CNs or CCs identification public key.
The method used to obtain a node id will either enhance or limit the trustworthiness of that entity when propagating messages through them on the Tari communication network.

> When performing the broadcasting of data messages or propagating discovery requests, nodes with registration assigned node ids are considered more trustworthy compared to nodes with derived node ids. 

Author: Yes, when using a derived node id it is much easier for a Bad Actors to place himself in an ideal position in the network to perform shenanigans, where a Node with a registration assigned node id has very little control over where he is located in the network making shenanigans more difficult.

> Obtaining a node id from registration on the Base Layer is important as it will limit the potential of some parties performing Eclipse attacks on the network.

Author: I've added a link to the text that describes what an Eclipse attack is, here is an excerpt from the paper: "In an eclipse attack, the attacker monopolizes all of the victim’s incoming and outgoing connections, thus isolating the victim from the rest of its peers in the network. The attacker can then filter the victim’s view of the blockchain, force the victim to waste compute power on obsolete views of the blockchain, or coopt the victim’s compute power for its own nefarious purposes"

Registration makes it more difficult for [Bad Actor]s to position themselves in ideal patterns on the network to perform disruptive operations and actions. 

> Also, in sensitive situations or situations where the Kademlia style directed propagation of messages are vulnerable then gossip protocol based broadcasting of messages can be performed as a less efficient, but safer alternative to ensure that the message will successfully reach the rest of the network.

Author: Changes applied in new PR.

The routing table consists of a list of peer addresses that link node ids, public identification keys and online communication addresses of each known CC and CN.

The Peer Address stored in the routing table can be implemented as follows:

| Description      | Data type          | Comments                                                                 |
|---               |---                 |---                                                                       |
| network address  | network_address    | The online communication address of the CC or CN                         |
| node_id          | node_id            | Registration Assigned for VN, Self selected for BN, W and AM             |
| public_key       | public_key         | The public key of the identification cryptographic key of the CC or CN   |
| node_type        | node_type          | VN, BN, W or AM                                                          |
| linked asset ids | list of asset ids  | Asset ids can be used as an address on Tari network similar to a node id |

> | last_connection  | timestamp          | Time of last successful connection with peer                             |

Author: I think a ping request might be very light weight. Maybe then an update of the peer address information should have a separate call and timestamp. I will add and extra field called "update_timestamp", except if you have a better name?

> | last_connection  | timestamp          | Time of last successful connection with peer                             |

Reviewer 3: look at the ping request in the sync rfc, the proposal is, especially between base node to include the pow and last hash in as well.

> | last_connection  | timestamp          | Time of last successful connection with peer                             |

Author: I did go read the sync rfc and I think the ping and pong requests should be as generic and lightweight as possible as all your peer connections are not only Base Nodes, but you could include extra information in the message depending on the type of node you have a peer connection with.

> | last_connection  | timestamp          | Time of last successful connection with peer                             |

Reviewer 2: `last_update`?

When a new CC or CN wants to join the Tari communication network they need to submit a joining request to the rest of the network.
The joining request contains the peer address of the new CC or CN.
Each CN that receives the joining request can decide if they want to add the new CCs or CNs contact information to their local routing table.
When a CN, that received the joining request, has a similar node id to the new CC or CN then that node must add the peer address to their routing table.
All CNs with similar node ids to the new CC or CN should have a copy of the new peer address in their routing tables.

> To limit potential attacks, only one registration with the same online communication address can be stored in the routing table of a CN.

Author: - For IPv4 and IPv6 it would not be possible, but if Tor or I2P addresses were used I believe you could spin up more than one node behind the same VPN. Your bandwidth will be limited when doing this with I2P or Tor addresses. We can discuss this, but I think it might be a good thing to have this restriction.
- That is true, I also think that a user should be able to run a VN, BN, W and TW from one machine. I changed the wording of the sentence slightly to allow for this exception.

> This restriction will limit Bad Actors from spinning up multiple CNs on a single computer.

Author: - A node id clash is very unlikely especially for node ids obtain from registration, derived node ids are a bit more open to manipulation. Generating a node id clash is as difficult as guessing someone's wallet address. Let's say I am a Bad Actor and want the same node id as another existing CC or CN, then I need to find a public key( and corresponding private key) that will generate the same node id. Having the private key for that public key is a must, otherwise you cant sign your joining request and it will be thrown out by the network. If someone validly generates a node id clash then the existing CC or CN is completely compromised, not just his network location.
- If a Bad CN does allow multiple registrations from the same online address in his local routing table it won't break the communication network. This is just a mechanism for the CN or CC to limit some unwanted registrations in their routing table, it could work without it.

> This restriction will limit Bad Actors from spinning up multiple CNs on a single computer.

Reviewer 3: But what about when we have 2 node ID's registering on the same block? Are we including some unique number in there to allow this?

> This restriction will limit Bad Actors from spinning up multiple CNs on a single computer.

Author: I think we have two options: 
- Option 1: node ID=hash(hash(block)||public_key) => This allows more than one registration per block, but the Validator Node might have some control to manipulate its node ID. I think it will be difficult enough that it wont be an issue.

- Option 2: node_id=hash(block) => Limit the number of Validator Node registrations per block so that there is only one. All values used in node ID generation is out of the control of the new Validator Node.

> This restriction will limit Bad Actors from spinning up multiple CNs on a single computer.

Reviewer 3: option 1 would be fine, you wont know the block hash before time

Other CCs and CNs will then be able to retrieve the new CCs or CNs peer address by submitting discovery requests.
Once the peer address of the desired CC or CN has been discovered then a direct P2P communication channel can be established between the two parties for any future communication.
After discovery, the rest of the Tari communication network will be unaware of any further communication between the two parties.

#### Sending Data Messages and Discovery Requests

The majority of all communication on the Tari communication network will be performed using direct P2P channels established between different CCs and CNs once they are aware of the peer addresses of each other that contain their online communication addresses.
Message propagation on the network will typically consist only of joining and discovery requests where a CC or CN wants to join the network or retrieve the peer address of another CC or CN so that a direct P2P channel can be established.

Messages can be transmitted in this network in either an unencrypted or encrypted form.

> Typically messages that have been sent in unencrypted form is of interest to a number of CNs on the network and should be propagated so that every CN that is interested in that data message obtains a copy.

Reviewer 3: are we using something like dandelion? Or just plain old gossip?

Author: I believe dandelion will not be a good option in this specific case as the reason we are applying gossip is to ensure that immediately we send the message to as many peers as possible in the hope that at least one of them is good and propagate the message. We can discuss this further if needed.

Reviewer: Dandelion is maybe a good idea when a wallet wants to submit a transaction to a base node.

Author: - If a peer connection was established between a wallet and a base node, both will know each other's online address, otherwise the connection could not be established in the first place. When the transaction is then included in the mempool of the base node and it starts propagating to other base nodes. Knowledge of the wallets online address won't be known by any of the other base nodes.
- The next example is similar to the Dandelion mechanism. If the wallet wants to keep knowledge of the transaction private, he can encrypt the transaction as a data message that is sent to some other base node through the network. Once it reaches the destination base node, it will decrypt the message and add the transaction to its mempool. The first CN that was contacted by the wallet will only know that a data message was sent, which could be anything such as a discovery request. In this case, every hop might still know the public key of the wallet so they can filter spam messages on the network.

Reviewer 3: second option could work, but it will be upto the wallet to check the mempool to ensure it reaches the mempool. 

I know dandelion has a fall back that states every node in the stem fase must check it, if it doesnt reach the mempool they transmit.  But thats a minor thing, and not enforceable.

Reviewer: Maybe adding something like this can value add?

"_Privacy of a Wallet's IP address, whom is sending a Tx to a Base Node, MAY be enhanced if the Tx is encrypted and sent to a Base Node with node ID that is not the closest to the Wallet's node ID. This should prevent linking a Tx to the originating IP address._"

Author: Added slightly modified version to "Sending Data Messages and Discovery Requests" section

Reviewer: Looks good to me

> Typically messages that have been sent in unencrypted form is of interest to a number of CNs on the network and should be propagated so that every CN that is interested in that data message obtains a copy.

Author: Change applied in new PR.

Block and Transaction propagation are examples of data messages where multiple entities on the Tari communication network are interested in that data message, this requires propagation through the entire Tari communication network in unencrypted form.

Encrypted data messages make use of the source and destinations identification cryptographic keys to construct a shared secret with which the message can be encoded and decoded.
This ensures that only the two parties are able to decode the data message as it is propagated through the communication network.
This mechanism can be used to perform private discovery requests, where the online communication address of the source node is encrypted and propagated through the network until it reached the destination node.
Private discovery requests can only be performed if both parties are online at the same time.

> Encryption of the data message ensuring that only the destination node is able to view the online address of the source node as the data message moves through the network.

Author: At every timestep during the propagation of the data message through the network, each CN will believe the data message originated from the previous peer CN, even though it might have had a number of hops from one CN to another. If someone is able to intercept the the http packet they will only be able to retrieve the online address of the previous peer node and not the source.
The original origin of the message will not be know, except maybe the sources identification public key.

Once the destination node receives and decrypts the data message, that node is then able to establish a P2P communication channel with the source node for any further communication.

> Propagation of completely private discovery request, hidden as an encrypted data message, can be performed as a broadcast through the entire network using the Gossip protocol.

Author: One way to limit misuse of the messaging system is to have data messages that have a visible and encrypted part, and a signature.  The source node must have its identification public key visible and sign the entire message (visible and encrypted part). No one on the network will know who the destination node is, but they are able to ban/blacklist the specific source node if needed. The signing of the message will limit users from mimicking other users. Maybe a mechanism like this could work?

> Propagation of completely private discovery request, hidden as an encrypted data message, can be performed as a broadcast through the entire network using the Gossip protocol.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good for now

Propagation of public discovery requests can be performed using more efficient directed propagation using the Kademlia protocol.
As encrypted message with visible destinations tend to not be of interest to the rest of the network, directed propagation using the Kademlia protocol to forward these messages to the correct parties are preferred.

This same encryption technique can be used to send encrypted messages to a single node or a group of nodes, where the group of nodes have shared identification keys.
A Validation Committee is an example of a group of CNs that have shared identification keys for the committee.

> The shared identification keys ensure that all members of that committee are able to receive and decrypt data messages that were sent to the committee.

Author: A 1-of-n signature could work, but my fear is that it will become a single common point making it 1-of-1. I think this is true for the Shamir's secret-sharing scheme but maybe not for other 1-of-n signature schemes. I believe the Asset Creator should create the shared identification keys (for the committee) during the Asset Creation process.

#### Maintaining connections with peers

CCs and CNs establish and maintain connections with peers differently.
CCs only create a few short-lived ad hoc channels and CNs create and maintain long-lived channels with a number of peers.

If a CC is unaware of a destination CNs or CCs online communication address then the address first needs to be obtained using a discovery request.

> When a CC already know the communication address of the CC or CN that he wants to communicate with, then a direct P2P channel can be established between the two peers for the duration of the communication task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a CC already knows the communication address of the CC or CN that he wants to communicate with, then a direct P2P channel can be established between the two peers for the duration of the communication task.
```

Author: Change applied in new PR.

The communication channel can then be closed as soon as the communication task has been completed.

CNs consisting of VNs and BNs typically attempt to maintain communication channels with a large number of peers.
The distribution of peers (VNs vs BNs) that a single CN keeps communication channels open with can change depending on the type of node.
A CN that is also a BN should maintain more peer connections with other BNs, but should also have some connections with other VNs.

> Having some connections with VNs are important as BNs have derived node ids and not registered node ids such as VNs, making it possible for the CN to be separated from the main network and become victim to an eclipse attack.

Reviewer 3: add a ref link explaining eclipse attacks eg: https://www.radixdlt.com/post/what-is-an-eclipse-attack

Author: Added a link to a paper on Eclipse attack at first use, also added your suggested link to second use.

Having some connections with VNs will make it more difficult to separate the CN from the network and will ensure successful propagation of transactions and completed blocks from that CN. 

A CN that is also a VN should maintain more peer connections with other VNs, but also have some connections with BNs.

> CNs that are part of Validator Node committees should attempt to maintain permanent connections with the other members of the committee to ensure that quick consensus can be achieved.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps add here that the type of p2p channel is open for debate between the nodes. Do they want tor, i2p or for example something faster like ipv4?

Author: From the proposed network address type it is up to the CC or CN to decide what they want to use as an online address. I think that IPv4, IPv6, URL, Tor(Base32) and I2P(Base32) addresses should be allowed.

Reviewer: The owner of a wallet may want the fact that they are transacting to be as private as possible. We may rate the different choices so users can select the appropriate mechanisms.

Author: I wasn't sure how to rate them, so I added the following small paragraph: "A Tor or I2P address can be used when anonymity is important for a CC or CN. The IPv4, IPv6 and URL address types do not provide any privacy features but do provide increased bandwidth. "

Reviewer: Good for me, thanks. Maybe consider
"_A Tor or I2P address **SHOULD** be used when anonymity is important for a CC or CN._"

Reviewer 3: Perhaps we should add a list of addresses type thing, as a CC or CN might not have a Tor or I2P address.

Author: I think it is clear from the "online communication address type" that there are 5 options:  IPv4, IPv6, URL, Tor (Base32) or I2P (Base32) address

Reviewer 3: What I mean is that we should allow users to have more than one address. 

The example I have is that a VN might want to give out say a tor address, but he might want to give a IPv4 address for his VN peers.

Author: With the current structure a CN could give out different addresses to other CNs and CCs, but every CC or CN will only have one peer address with one network address in their routing table. Having a list of network addresses for each peer address could be a future improvement.

To maintain connections with peers, the following process can be performed.

> Once some peers have been found using discovery requests, resulting in them successfully being added to the local routing table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Discover peers using discovery requests, and add their details to the local routing table.
```

Author: Change applied in new PR.

The CN can decide how the peer connections should be selected from the routing table by either:
 - manually selecting a subset,
 - automatically selecting a random subset or
 - selecting a subset of neighbouring nodes with similar node ids. 

>  Maintaining communication channels are important and the following process can be followed in an attempt to keep peer connections alive:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Maintaining communication channels is important and the following process can be followed in an attempt to keep peer connections alive:
```

Author: Change applied in new PR.

For an existing peer connection.
When more than 30 minutes have passed since the last communication with that peer, then a heartbeat message should be sent to the peer in an attempt to keep the connection with the peer alive.

> If that specific peer connection is not important then a new peer can be selected from the local routing table.

Reviewer 2: > is not important 
That's a very vague descriptor. Is it possible to be more specific here?

Author: I revised the sentence to be more descriptive: "If the peer connection was not established for a specific purpose, such as with the connections between committee members, then a new replacement peer can be selected from the local routing table."

Reviewer 2: 👍

A new connection can then be established and maintained between the current node and the newly selected node.
If that specific connection is important, such as with the connections between committee members, then the current CN or CC must wait and attempt to create a new connection with that same peer.
If more than 90 minutes have passed since the last successful communication with the peer node, a new discovery request can be sent on the Tari communication network in an attempt to locate that peer again.
Losing of a peer might happen in cases where the CN or CC went temporarily offline and their dynamic communication address changed, requiring the discovery process to be performed again before a direct P2P communication channel can be established.

#### Functionality Required of Consensus Nodes

- It MUST select a cryptographic key pair used for identification on the Tari Communication network.
- A CN MAY request the peer addresses of CNs with similar node ids from other CNs to extend their local routing table. 

> - If a CN is a VN, then a node id MUST be obtained by registering on the Base layer.

Reviewer 3: what happens if there is a clash?

Author: I might be incorrect, but I think the likelihood of a clash is the same as the likelihood of generating the same private key as another user. If a VN discovers a clash directly after registration, then he might have to reregister to obtain a new node id. I think registered node ids should have priority over derived node ids. Do you have any suggestions how we could deal with this?

Reviewer: We may need to specify hashing of some sort of entropy to be included in the cryptographic key pair.

Reviewer 2: If a node ID is some hash(public key || ...) there's an infinitesimal chance of a clash. The simplest algo would be
```
  Generate id = H(PK || ...)
  If clash (which happens every 1 in 2^200 times or something), try again with:  a new set of keys, or modify "Other data"
```

- If a CN is a BN, then a node id MUST be derived from the nodes identification public key.
- A new CN MUST submit a joining request to the Tari communication network so that the nodes peer address can be added to the routing table of neighbouring peers in the network.
- If a CN receives a new joining request with a similar node id (within a network selected threshold), then the peer address specified in the joining request MUST be added to its local routing table.
- When a CN receives an encrypted message, the node MUST attempt to open the message.

> - When a CN receives an encrypted message that the node is unable to open, and the destination node id is known then the CN MUST forward it to all connected peers that have node ids that are closer to the destination.

Reviewer 2: Just a thought -- you're roughly describing the Kademlia protocol. In your opinion, should we implement the protocol wholesale, or are you proposing a "lite" version?

If the former, perhaps you might want to reframe the requirements as "A CN MUST implement the Kademlia protocol ver n.m. ..."

Author: I think we have different requirements for our communication protocol such as not storing files, different peer selection strategies, different method of obtaining node ids, propagation of encrypted and decrypted messages, broadcasting and directed forwarding. This makes me wonder if we should not rather implement our own version that is only based on the Kademlia protocol. Maybe Stanimal can provide some more insight, as I understand he is busy with a TLU on the subject.

- When a CN receives an encrypted message that the node is unable to open and the destination node is unknown then the CN MUST forward the message to all connected peers.
- A CN MUST have the ability to verify the content of unencrypted messages to limit the propagation of spam messages.

> - If an unencrypted message is received by the CN with a unspecified destination node id, then the node MUST verify the content of the message and forward the message to all connected peers.

Reviewer 2: I'm still concerned that this opens the door to large-scale spam attacks. Are there TTLs on these messages? When do nodes know to stop passing the message around?

Reviewer 3: Unencrypted message can be checked, if you receive junk message from your peer, either he didnt check it, or he created it. He gets blacklisted. 

Encrypted messages  can be a bit more specific. Perhaps the created must sign it, and if he creates too many messages he gets blacklisted?

Author: A CN should probably have a message storage list for recently distributed messages and should only send a new message to peers if it hasn't been sent before.

Reviewer 3: For gossip this is a requirement anyway I think.

- If an unencrypted message is received by the CN with an specified destination node id, then the node MUST verify the content of the message and forward the message to all connected peers that have closer node ids.

> - A CN MUST have the ability to select a set of peer connection from its routing table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A CN MUST have the ability to select a set of peer connections from its routing table.
```

Author: Change applied in new PR.

The Tari communication network consists of a number of different entities that need to communicate in a distributed and ad-hoc manner. 
The primary entities that need to communicate are Validator Nodes (VN), [Base Node]s (BN), [Wallet]s (W) and Token Wallet (TW).
Here are some examples of different communication tasks that need to be performed by these entities on the Tari Communication network:
- Base Nodes on the Base Layer need to propagate completed blocks and transactions to other Base Nodes using Gossip protocol based broadcasting.
- Validator Nodes need to efficiently discover other Validator Nodes in the process of forming Validator Node committees. 
- Wallets need to communicate and negotiate with other Wallets to create transactions. They also need the ability to submit transactions to the [mempool] of Base Nodes.
- Token Wallets need to communicate with Validator Node [committee]s and other Token Wallets to construct and send DAN instructions.

> Here is an overview communication matrix that show which source entities need to communicate with other destination entities on the Tari Communication network:

Reviewer: I think this table should be added to the MUST requirement category.

Author: I'm not sure this should be a "MUST". Technically, any entity can speak to any other entity on the network, but it could be implemented that any comms that is "No" in this table could be ignored?

Reviewer: Let us consider SHOULD....

Author: Change applied.

#### Consensus Nodes and Consensus Clients

To simplify the description of the Tari communication network, the different entities with similar behaviour were grouped into two groups: Consensus Nodes and Consensus Clients.
Validator Nodes and Base Nodes are Consensus Nodes(CN).
Wallets and Token Wallets are Communication Clients(CC).
CNs form the core communication infrastructure of the Tari communication network and are responsible for maintaining the Tari communication network by receiving, forwarding and distributing joining requests, discovery requests, data messages and routing information.
CCs are different from CNs in that they do not maintain the network and they are not responsible for propagating any joining requests, discovery requests, data messages and routing information.
They do make use of the network to submit their own joining requests and perform discovery request of other specific CNs and CCs when they need to communicate with them.
Once a CC has discovered the CC or CN they want to communicate with, they will establish a direct P2P channel with them.
The Tari communication network is unaware of this direct P2P communication once discovery is completed.

> The different entity types were grouped into the different communication node types as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The different entity types are grouped into the different communication node types as follows:
```

Author: Changed in new PR.

> The different entity types were grouped into the different communication node types as follows:

Reviewer: I think this table should be added to the MUST requirement category.

Author: Changed to "MUST"

This node id is either assigned based on registration on the Base Layer or can be derived from the CNs or CCs identification public key.
The method used to obtain a node id will either enhance or limit the trustworthiness of that entity when propagating messages through them on the Tari communication network.
When performing the broadcasting of data messages or propagating discovery requests, nodes with registration assigned node ids are considered more trustworthy compared to nodes with derived node ids. 

Obtaining a node id from registration on the Base Layer is important as it will limit the potential of some parties performing [Eclipse attacks](https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/263.pdf) on the network.
Registration makes it more difficult for [Bad Actor]s to position themselves in ideal patterns on the network to perform disruptive operations and actions. 
In sensitive situations or situations where the Kademlia-style directed propagation of messages are vulnerable, gossip protocol-based broadcasting of messages can be performed as a less efficient, but safer alternative to ensure that the message will successfully reach the rest of the network.

> The recommended method of node id assignment for each Tari communication network entity type are as follows:

Reviewer: I think this table should be added to the MUST requirement category.

Author: Changed to "MUST"

| Entity Type    | Communication Node Type | Node ID Assignment |
|---             |---                      |---                 |
| Validator Node | Consensus Node          | Registration       |
| Base Node      | Consensus Node          | Derived            |
| Wallet         | Consensus Client        | Derived            |
| Token Wallet   | Consensus Client        | Derived            |

Note that [Mining Server]s and [Mining Worker]s are excluded from the Tari communication network.
A Mining Worker will have a local or remote P2P connection with a Mining Server.
A Mining Server will have a local or remote P2P connection with a Base Node.
They do not need to make use of the communication network and they are not responsible for propagating any messages on the network.
The parent Base Node will perform any communication tasks on the Tari communication network on their behalf.

#### Online Communication Address, Peer Address and Routing Table

Each CC and CN on the Tari communication network will have identification cryptographic keys, a node id and an online communication address.

> The online communication address can be either an IPv4, IPv6, URL, Tor(Base32) or I2P(Base32) address and can be stored using the network address type as follows:

Reviewer: I think this table should be added to the SHOULD requirement category.

Author: Change applied.

Each CC or CN has a local routing table that contains the online communication addresses of all CCs and CNs on the Tari communication network known to that CC or CN.
When a CC or CN wants to join the Tari communication network, the online communication address of at least one other CN that is part of the network needs to be known.
The online communication address of the initial CN can either be manually provided or a bootstrapped list of "reliable" and persistent CNs can be provided with the Validator Node, Base Node, Wallet or Token Wallet software.
The new CC or CN can then request additional peer contact information of other CNs from the initial peers to extend their own routing table.

The routing table consists of a list of peer addresses that link node ids, public identification keys and online communication addresses of each known CC and CN.

> The Peer Address stored in the routing table can be implemented as follows:

Reviewer: I think this table should be added to the MAY requirement category.

Author: Changed to "MAY"

Once the peer address of the desired CC or CN has been discovered then a direct P2P communication channel can be established between the two parties for any future communication.
After discovery, the rest of the Tari communication network will be unaware of any further communication between the two parties.

#### Sending Data Messages and Discovery Requests

The majority of all communication on the Tari communication network will be performed using direct P2P channels established between different CCs and CNs once they are aware of the peer addresses of each other that contain their online communication addresses.
Message propagation on the network will typically consist only of joining and discovery requests where a CC or CN wants to join the network or retrieve the peer address of another CC or CN so that a direct P2P channel can be established.

Messages can be transmitted in this network in either an unencrypted or encrypted form.
Typically messages that have been sent in unencrypted form is of interest to a number of CNs on the network and should be propagated so that every CN that is interested in that data message obtains a copy.

> Block and Transaction propagation are examples of data messages where multiple entities on the Tari communication network are interested in that data message, this requires propagation through the entire Tari communication network in unencrypted form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Block and Transaction propagation are examples of data messages where multiple entities on the Tari communication network are interested in that data message; this requires propagation through the entire Tari communication network in unencrypted form.
```

Author: Change applied in new PR.

Losing of a peer might happen in cases where the CN or CC went temporarily offline and their dynamic communication address changed, requiring the discovery process to be performed again before a direct P2P communication channel can be established.

#### Functionality Required of Consensus Nodes

- It MUST select a cryptographic key pair used for identification on the Tari Communication network.
- A CN MAY request the peer addresses of CNs with similar node ids from other CNs to extend their local routing table. 
- If a CN is a VN, then a node id MUST be obtained by registering on the Base layer.
- If a CN is a BN, then a node id MUST be derived from the nodes identification public key.
- A new CN MUST submit a joining request to the Tari communication network so that the nodes peer address can be added to the routing table of neighbouring peers in the network.
- If a CN receives a new joining request with a similar node id (within a network selected threshold), then the peer address specified in the joining request MUST be added to its local routing table.
- When a CN receives an encrypted message, the node MUST attempt to open the message.

> - When a CN receives an encrypted message that the node is unable to open, and the destination node id is known then the CN MUST forward it to all connected peers that have node ids that are closer to the destination.

Reviewer: Please define the '_closer_' concept somewhere in the text.

Author: I added a paragraph in the "Unique identification of Consensus Nodes and Consensus Clients" section that explains how node ID similarity is calculated and how it can be used.

Reviewer: Perfect!

- When a CN receives an encrypted message that the node is unable to open and the destination node is unknown then the CN MUST forward the message to all connected peers.
- A CN MUST have the ability to verify the content of unencrypted messages to limit the propagation of spam messages.
- If an unencrypted message is received by the CN with a unspecified destination node id, then the node MUST verify the content of the message and forward the message to all connected peers.

> - If an unencrypted message is received by the CN with an specified destination node id, then the node MUST verify the content of the message and forward the message to all connected peers that have closer node ids.

Reviewer: See comment about '_closer_'.

Reviewer: Maybe specify SHOULD?

i.e "_The similarity or distance between different node IDs SHOULD be calculated by performing the [Hamming distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamming_distance) between the bits of the two node ID numbers._"

- A CN MUST have the ability to select a set of peer connection from its routing table.
- Connections with the selected set of peers MUST be maintained by the CN.
- A CN MUST have a mechanism to construct encrypted and unencrypted joining requests, discovery requests or data messages.
- A CN MUST construct and provide a list of peer addresses from its routing table that is similar to a requested node id so that other CCs and CNs can extend their routing tables.
- A CN MUST keep its routing table up to date by removing unreachable peer addresses and adding newly received addresses.
- It MUST have a mechanism to determine if a node id was obtained through registration or was derived from an identification public key.

#### Functionality Required of Consensus Clients

- It MUST select a cryptographic key pair used for identification on the Tari Communication network.

> - It MUST have a mechanism to derive a node_id from the self-selected identification public key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It MUST have a mechanism to derive a node ID from the self-selected identification public key.
```

Author: Change applied in new PR.

- A CC must have the ability to construct a peer address that links its identification public key, node id and an online communication address.
- A new CC MUST broadcast a joining request with its peer address to the Tari communication network so that CNs with similar node ids can add the peer address of the new CC to their routing tables.
- A CC MAY request the peer addresses of CNs with similar node ids from other CNs to extend their local routing table.
- A CC MUST have a mechanism to construct encrypted and unencrypted joining and discovery requests.

> - A CC MUST maintain a small routing table of Tari Communication network peers with which ad hoc connections can be established.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A CC MUST maintain a small persistent routing table of Tari Communication network peers with which ad hoc connections can be established.
```

Author: Change applied in new PR.

[BCP 14](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp14) (covering RFC2119 and RFC8174) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as 
shown here.

## Disclaimer

The purpose of this document and its content is for information purposes only and may be subject to change or update
without notice.

This document may include preliminary concepts that may or may not be in the process of being developed by the Tari
community. The release of this document is intended solely for review and discussion by the community regarding the
technological merits of the potential system outlined herein.

## Goals

This document will introduce the Tari communication network and the communication protocol used to select, establish and maintain connections between peers on the network.
[Consensus Node]s and [Consensus Client]s will be introduced and their required functionality will be proposed.

## Related RFCs

* [RFC-0100: The Tari Base Layer](RFC-0100_BaseLayer.md)
* [RFC-0300: Digital asset network](RFC-0300_DAN.md)

## Description

### Assumptions

- A communication channel can be established between two peers once their online communication addresses are known to each other.

> - A [Validator Node] is able to derive a [node ID] from the registered location on the Base Layer.

Author: Changed wording to "A Validator Node is able to derive a node ID from the Validator Node registration transaction on the Base Layer."

Where messages are of importance to a wide variety of entities on the network, Gossip protocol based message propagation can be performed to distribute the message to the entire network.

### Overview

The Tari communication network is a variant of a [Kademlia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kademlia) network that allows for fast discovery of nodes, with an added ability to perform Gossip protocol based broadcasting of data messages to the entire network.
The majority of the communication required on the [Base Layer] and [Digital Asset Network] (DAN) will be performed via direct P2P communication between known clients and nodes.
Alternatively, the Tari communication network can be used for broadcasting joining requests, discovery requests and propagating data messages such as completed blocks, transactions and data messages that are of interest to a large part of the Tari communication network. 

The Tari communication network consists of a number of different entities that need to communicate in a distributed and ad-hoc manner. 

> The primary entities that need to communicate are Validator Nodes (VN), [Base Node]s (BN), [Wallet]s (W) and Token Wallet (TW).

Author: Added "Token Wallet" Glossary item

When performing the broadcasting of data messages or propagating discovery requests, nodes with registration assigned node IDs are considered more trustworthy compared to nodes with derived node IDs. 

Obtaining a node ID from registration on the Base Layer is important as it will limit the potential of some parties performing [Eclipse attacks](https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/263.pdf) on the network.
Registration makes it more difficult for [Bad Actor]s to position themselves in ideal patterns on the network to perform disruptive operations and actions. 
In sensitive situations or situations where the Kademlia-style directed propagation of messages are vulnerable, gossip protocol-based broadcasting of messages can be performed as a less efficient, but safer alternative to ensure that the message will successfully reach the rest of the network.

The similarity or distance between different node IDs can be calculated by performing the [Hamming distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamming_distance) between the bits of the two node ID numbers.
The Hamming distance can be implemented as an Exclusive OR (XOR) between the bits of the numbers and the summation of the resulting true bits.

> CCs and/or CNs that have node IDs with a low Hamming distance are located in similar regions of the Tari communication network.

Author: Revised the sentence to "CCs and/or CNs that have similar node IDs, that produce a small Hamming distance, are located in similar regions of the Tari communication network."

Losing of a peer might happen in cases where the CN or CC went temporarily offline and their dynamic communication address changed, requiring the discovery process to be performed again before a direct P2P communication channel can be established.

#### Functionality Required of Consensus Nodes

- It MUST select a cryptographic key pair used for identification on the Tari Communication network.
- A CN MAY request the peer addresses of CNs with similar node IDs from other CNs to extend their local routing table. 
- If a CN is a VN, then a node ID MUST be obtained by registering on the Base layer.
- If a CN is a BN, then a node ID MUST be derived from the nodes identification public key.
- A new CN MUST submit a joining request to the Tari communication network so that the nodes peer address can be added to the routing table of neighbouring peers in the network.
- If a CN receives a new joining request with a similar node ID (within a network selected threshold), then the peer address specified in the joining request MUST be added to its local routing table.

> - When a CN receives an encrypted message, the node MUST attempt to open the message.

Reviewer 4: This bears some thinking about, recently heard about attacks where a malicious message is constructed and the process of trying to open it can crash a node. Might just be hypothetical but I do think there is a spam vector here.

Author: Maybe the source public key must always be in the clear so that a check can be performed to determine if it was blacklisted before attempting to open the message.

- It MUST have a mechanism to determine if a node ID was obtained through registration or was derived from an identification public key.
- A CN MUST calculate the similarity between different node IDs by calculating the Hamming distance between the bits of the two node ID numbers.

#### Functionality Required of Consensus Clients

- It MUST select a cryptographic key pair used for identification on the Tari Communication network.
- It MUST have a mechanism to derive a node ID from the self-selected identification public key.
- A CC must have the ability to construct a peer address that links its identification public key, node ID and an online communication address.
- A new CC MUST broadcast a joining request with its peer address to the Tari communication network so that CNs with similar node IDs can add the peer address of the new CC to their routing tables.
- A CC MAY request the peer addresses of CNs with similar node IDs from other CNs to extend their local routing table.
- A CC MUST have a mechanism to construct encrypted and unencrypted joining and discovery requests.

> - A CC MUST maintain a small persistent routing table of Tari Communication network peers with which ad hoc connections can be established.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A CC SHOULD maintain a small persistent routing table of Tari Communication network peers with which ad hoc connections can be established.
```

There is no way this can be enforced, by not keeping a small routing table you are effectively only limiting your self, it might be advantages to keep a larger one

Author: You must have a small routing table(with minimum 1 reliable peer connection) otherwise you can't connect to the network. I agree with you that it is beneficial to have the big routing table, but it is only recommended and not a requirement.

Reviewer 3: It does not need to, but it could still receive messages from other peers. eg just a basenode listening on the network and not actively forwarding and participating in the network.

Author: I do not agree, no peers in routing table equals no connection or listening on Tari network.

Reviewer 2: @SWvheerden MUST, SHOULD etc. are specification imperatives, so it's allowed to have a MUST directive even if it can't be enforced. Any code not following that directive is simply not written according to the spec.

The test here is: Will a node work without a routing table? I imagine one could provide a single peer address as part of the executable argument list (i.e. you build a peer list, but it's not persistent) and the node would still work, so that does suggest SHOULD
